Document request forgery (#3996)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

protocol, a request forgery attack is often used to exploit any implicit
authorization conferred on the peer by the victim due to the peer's location in
the network.

For request forgery to be effective, an attacker needs to be able to influence
what packets the peer sends and where these packets are sent. If an attacker
can target a vulnerable service with a controlled payload, that service might
perform actions that are attributed to the attacker's peer, but decided by the
attacker.

For example, cross-site request forgery {{?CSRF=DOI.10.1145/1455770.1455782}}
exploits on the Web cause a client to issue requests that include authorization
cookies {{?COOKIE=RFC6265}}, allowing one site access to information and
actions that are intended to be restricted to a different site.

As QUIC runs over UDP, the primary attack modality of concern is one where an
attacker can select the address to which its peer sends UDP datagrams and can
control some of the unprotected content of those packets. As much of the data
sent by QUIC endpoints is protected, this includes control over ciphertext. An
attack is successful if an attacker can cause a peer to send a UDP datagram to

> a host that will perform some action based on content in the datagram.

Reviewer: Could we add a paragraph here that provides examples of real harm? What protocols are both UDP-based and non-authenticated in a way that would make them vulnerable to a request forgery from a QUIC stack?

Author: I don't have anything concrete.  Any example would be hard to describe with anything other than "this person/organization did something really unwise".  Given the absence of a news-worthy example that would be easy to reference, this is really just a request to search for someone to shame.

Reviewer: I'm not trying to shame anyone. I'm trying to ascertain whether this change is the right one: we're worsening the performance of the protocol (by requiring extra round-trips in some scenarios) and if the attack is purely theoretical then we shouldn't do that. Having a concrete example of actual harm would help motivate the performance degradation.

Author: The only place this adds a round trip is for a migration to a preferred address, but that only delays migration, it doesn't prevent the connection from being used.

Reviewer 2: The Message Send Service (RFC 1312) seems like a potential target.

>    This service is primarily intended for "open" environments:
>   controlled local area networks used by reasonably trusted
>   participants, in which security considerations may be relaxed in the
>   interests of ease of use and administration. In such an environment
>   it is appropriate to trust the user name and source IP address as
>   identifying the actual sender of the message.

encrypt future packets. Successful control over datagram content then only
requires that the attacker be able to predict the packet number and placement
of frames in packets with some amount of reliability.

This section assumes that limiting control over datagram content is not
feasible. The focus of the mitigations in subsequent sections is on limiting
the ways in which datagrams that are sent prior to address validation can be
used for request forgery.

### Request Forgery with Client Initial Packets

An attacker acting as a server can choose the IP address and port on which it
advertises its availability, so Initial packets from clients are assumed to be
available for use in this sort of attack. The address validation implicit in
the handshake ensures that - for a new connection - a client will not send
other types of packet to a destination that does not understand QUIC or is not
willing to accept a QUIC connection.

Initial packet protection (Section 5.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}) makes it difficult for
servers to control the content of Initial packets sent by clients. A client
choosing an unpredictable Destination Connection ID ensures that servers are

> unable to control any of the encrypted portion of Initial packets from clients.

Reviewer 3: I don't believe that this is correct as written if there is a Retry because the server gets to control the next DCID. I don't think that this is relevant because you would need a round trip to make it work (I think!) but...

Reviewer: This is mentioned in the last paragraph of this section. Perhaps we just need to reference that here?

attacks that rely on the Token field can be avoided if clients send an empty
Token field when the server address has changed from when the NEW_TOKEN frame
was received.

Therefore, clients SHOULD NOT send a token received in a NEW_TOKEN frame from
one server address in an Initial packet that is sent to a different server
address. As strict equality might reduce the utility of this mechanism, clients
MAY employ heuristics that result in different server addresses being treated
as equivalent, such as treating addresses with a shared prefix of sufficient
length as being functionally equivalent (for instance, /24 in IPv4 or /56 in
IPv6). In addition, clients SHOULD treat a preferred address that is
successfully validated as equivalent to the address on which the connection was
made; see {{preferred-address}}.

Sending a Retry packet ({{packet-retry}}) offers a server the option to change
the Token field. After sending a Retry, the server can also control the
Destination Connection ID field of subsequent Initial packets from the client.
This also might allow indirect control over the encrypted content of Initial

> packets. However, the exchange of a Retry packet validates the server's

Reviewer: Do we have text that explicitly mandates that replies to a RETRY packet MUST be sent to the same address?

address, thereby preventing the use of subsequent Initial packets for request
forgery.

### Request Forgery with Preferred Addresses

Servers can specify a preferred address, which clients then migrate to after
confirming the handshake; see {{preferred-address}}. The Destination Connection
ID field of packets that the client sends to a preferred address can be used
for request forgery.

> A client MUST NOT send non-probing frames to a preferred address prior to

Reviewer: Seeing this normative requirement in Security Considerations makes me uneasy as an implementer might miss it. Could we instead move the `MUST NOT` to the section that defines preferred_address and then only reference it here?

validating that address; see {{address-validation}}. This greatly reduces the
options that a server has to control the encrypted portion of datagrams.

This document does not offer any additional countermeasures that are specific
to use of preferred addresses and can be implemented by endpoints. The generic
measures described in {{forgery-generic}} could be used as further mitigation.

### Request Forgery with Spoofed Migration

Clients are able to present a spoofed source address as part of an apparent
connection migration to cause a server to send datagrams to that address.

The Destination Connection ID field in any packets that a server subsequently

> sends to this spoofed address can be used for request forgery.

Reviewer 3: Actually, I think not just DCID. Consider a (contrived) protocol in which the server was able to dictate the contents of the client's plaintext message. Because the server knows the keys, it can then produce any ciphertext of its choice.

Reviewer 3: While the above is contrived, the server *does* have control of some things. For instance, I can control some of the content of GETs or ACKs.

Reviewer: Isn't that prevented by address validation?

Author: No, this is general, but it is mentioned above.  I will add a reminder.

A server that only sends probing packets ({{probing}}) to an address prior to

> address validation provides an attacker with only limited control over the

Reviewer: I do find it somewhat ironic that address validation might make this worse: the client sending a PATH_CHALLENGE to the server can pretty much guarantee that the server will send a PATH_RESPONSE with client-provided content to the client's spoofed source address. Should we mention that?

additional steps are all discretionary as, depending on circumstances, they
could interfere with or prevent legitimate uses.

Services offered over loopback interfaces (that is, the IPv6 address ::1 or the
IPv4 address 127.0.0.1) often lack proper authentication. Endpoints MAY prevent
connection attempts or migration to a loopback address. Endpoints SHOULD NOT
allow connections or migration to a loopback address if the same service was
previously available at a different interface or if the address was provided by
a service at a non-loopback address. Endpoints that depend on these
capabilities could offer an option to disable these protections.

Similarly, endpoints could regard a change in address to link-local address
{{?RFC4291}} or an address in a private use range {{?RFC1918}} from a global,
unique-local {{?RFC4193}}, or non-private address as a potential attempt at
request forgery. Endpoints could refuse to use these addresses entirely, but
that carries a significant risk of interfering with legitimate uses. Endpoints
SHOULD NOT refuse to use an address unless they have specific knowledge about
the network indicating that sending datagrams to unvalidated addresses in a

> given range is not safe.

Reviewer: The recommendation in this paragraph is confusing to me. It somewhat concludes that this is a problem but contradicts itself in saying that implementers should both not allow migration and not refuse migration. I would prefer we figure out which strategy is best and recommend it instead of this.

Reviewer: Huh. I just reread the paragraph, and now it I agree with you that it mentions the issue and warns against reactionary solutions. I guess I must have misread it last time around, apologies.

Endpoints MAY choose to reduce the risk of request forgery by not including
values from NEW_TOKEN frames in Initial packets or by only sending probing
frames in packets prior to completing address validation. Note that this does
not prevent an attacker from using the Destination Connection ID field for an
attack.

Endpoints are not expected to have specific information about the location of
servers that could be vulnerable targets of a request forgery attack. However,
it might be possible over time to identify specific UDP ports that are common
targets of attacks or particular patterns in datagrams that are used for
attacks. Endpoints MAY choose to avoid sending datagrams to these ports or not
send datagrams that match these patterns prior to validating the destination
address. Endpoints MAY retire connection IDs containing patterns known to be
problematic without using them.

Note:

> : Modifying endpoints to apply these protections is more efficient than

Reviewer: This depends on what you mean by efficient. Some of the recommendations in this section will add a round-trip which is not efficient.

Reviewer: It's definitely possible that I'm the one confused. In my understanding, we have two ways of solving the "QUIC endpoint is sending attacker-controlled data to unvalidated address" issue:
1. the QUIC endpoint limits what it sends before validation
2. a magical network appliance verifies that the QUIC endpoint isn't sending evil packets where it shouldn't

I do agree with you that we want (1) instead of (2), but saying that (1) is more *efficient* than (2) isn't necessarily true if you measure efficiency as QUIC performance, because (1) can add a round trip but (2) doesn't

Author: The first requires that the endpoint decide *before* it sends anything.  It can't add a round trip, because that round trip would enable the attack.

connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION; see {{immediate-close}}.

## Request Forgery Attacks

A request forgery attack occurs where one endpoint causes its peer to perform
some unwanted action, such as issuing a request. Request forgery attacks aim to
provide an attacker with access to certain capabilities of its peer that might
otherwise be unavailable to the attacker. For a networking protocol, a request
forgery attack is often used to gain access to implicit authorization conferred
by their peer's location in the network.

For request forgery to be effective, an attacker needs to be able to influence
what their peer sends, and where it is sent. If an attacker can target a
vulnerable service with a controlled payload, that service might perform
actions that are attributed to the attacker's peer, but decided by the
attacker.

For example, cross-site request forgery {{?CSRF=DOI.10.1145/1455770.1455782}}
exploits on the Web cause a client to issue requests that include authorization
cookies {{?COOKIE=RFC6265}}, allowing one site access to information and

> actions that are intended to be restricted to a different site.

Author: I wanted to connect this with something that has a lot of existing documentation and explanatory material.  I found relatively little good material on the subject.

> As QUIC runs over UDP, the primary attack modality of concern is one where an

Author: I think I will pass on this one.  QUIC (this version, or invariants) run over UDP.

attacker can select the IP address and port to which a peer sends UDP datagrams
and also controls some of the unprotected content of those packets. As much of
the data sent by QUIC endpoints is protected, this includes control over

> ciphertext. An attack is successful if an attacker can cause a peer to send a

Author: We use a stream cipher, which is essentially an XOR with a predictable sequence.  If you know what the sequence is (this is trivial if you have the keys, just encrypt all zero values), then you know what the transform is and then, you can choose plaintext that is the XOR of the ciphertext you want.

UDP datagram to a host that will perform some action based on content in the
datagram that the attacker is able to control or influence.

This section discusses ways in which QUIC might be used for request forgery
attacks and describes countermeasures that can be implemented by QUIC
endpoints. These actions are described on the assumption that potential targets
for request forgery attacks take no action to protect against these attacks.
While it would be ideal if target services implement better protections, such
as strong authentication that does not rely on implicit signals, the goal of

> this section is to describe what a QUIC implementation or deployment can do.

Reviewer 2: If you take Jana's suggestion, ~~the goal of~~

  choose where a client sends datagrams, for example by populating DNS records;

* preferred addresses ({{preferred-address}}), where a server is able to choose
  where a client sends datagrams; and

* spoofed connection migrations ({{address-spoofing}}), where a client is able
  to use source address spoofing to select where a server sends subsequent
  datagrams.

These three options all involve cases where an endpoint sends datagrams to a
host that might not understand QUIC. That is, these packets are sent prior to
address validation; see {{address-validation}}.

Outside of the encrypted portion of packets, QUIC offers an endpoint several
options for controlling the content of UDP datagrams that a peer sends. The
Destination Connection ID field offers direct control over early bytes of every
packet sent by a peer; see {{connection-id}}. The Token field in Initial
packets offers a server control over other bytes of Initial packets; see
{{packet-initial}}.

There are no measures in the protocol to prevent indirect control over the
encrypted portions of packets. It is necessary to assume that endpoints are

> able to control the contents of frames that a peer sends, especially those

Author: This goes back to the encryption-by-XOR from above.  If I can control plaintext and make some good guesses about where it might appear, then I can control ciphertext.

frames that convey application data, such as STREAM frames. Though this depends
to some degree on details of the application protocol, some control is possible
in many protocol usage contexts. As the attacker has access to packet protection
keys, they are likely to be capable of predicting how a peer will encrypt future
packets. Successful control over datagram content then only requires that the
attacker be able to predict the packet number and placement of frames in packets
with some amount of reliability.

This section assumes that limiting control over datagram content is not

> feasible. The focus of the mitigations in subsequent sections is on limiting

Reviewer 4: I am assuming you mean to say that limiting this for the purposes of mitigating is not feasible. Perhaps phrase it as "It is reasonable to assume that mitigations that require limitations on datagram content are not feasible. Therefore, the focus of the mitigations ..."

Author: It would also be reasonable to implement some countermeasures that prevented control over datagram content.  The ciphertext fix does costs a lot though (it's a major change to the protocol that likely has a significant performance impact or requires the use of new ciphers) and it is not sufficient either as there are other more serious problems, like the SPA+connection ID one that I think we've agreed is too valuable a feature to dispense with (and options without this exposure are likely intractable for some server deployments).

I could write all of that down, but I thought it better to just state the assumption.

> the ways to use datagrams that are sent prior to address validation for request
> forgery.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the ways in which datagrams that are sent prior to address validation can be used
for request forgery.
```

> ### Request Forgery with Initial Packets

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Request Forgery with Client Initial Packets
```

> Servers are assumed to be able to choose the IP address and port on which they
> advertise their availability, so Initial packets from clients are assumed to be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An attacker acting as a server can choose the IP address and port on which it
advertises its availability, so Initial packets from clients are assumed to be
```

available for use in this sort of attack. The address validation implicit in
the handshake ensures that - for a new connection - a client will not send

> other types of packet to a destination that does not understand QUIC and is
> willing to accept connections.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
other types of packet to a destination that does not understand QUIC.
```

An endpoint that does not understand QUIC cannot be willing to accept QUIC connections.

Author: I think that was supposed to be "....or is not willing to accept a QUIC connection"

Initial packet protection (Section 5.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}) makes it difficult for

> servers to control the content of Initial packets. A client choosing an

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
servers to control the content of Initial packets from clients. A client choosing an
```

Reviewer 4: I think it's useful to clarify that this is not about the Initial packets from the server, which are trivially controllable.

unpredictable Destination Connection ID ensures that servers are unable to
control any of the encrypted portion of Initial packets. However, the Token
field is open to server control and does allow a server to use clients to mount
request forgery attacks.

Use of tokens provided with the NEW_TOKEN frame ({{validate-future}}) offers

> the only option for request forgery during connection establishment.

Reviewer 4: Split the para at "However" and combine with the following para.

> Clients are not obligated to use the NEW_TOKEN frame. Request forgery attacks

Reviewer 4: "Clients however are not ..."

> that rely on the Token field can be avoided if clients do not include a value

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that rely on the Token field can be avoided if clients do not include a value
```

when the server address has changed from when the NEW_TOKEN frame was received.

> Clients MUST NOT send a token received in a NEW_TOKEN frame from one server

Reviewer 5: This MUST NOT is qualified by the subsequent text to a point of being unenforceable, especially due to "shared prefix of a sufficient length".  Since it is up to implementations to choose what "sufficient" is, an implementation could deem "/0", to be "sufficient" and it would be valid.  Since this is unenforceable, it probably warrants a "SHOULD NOT".

Reviewer 4: Since there's a large escape hatch below, I agree that perhaps a SHOULD NOT is better here. The following text effectively explains why this isn't a MUST NOT.

Author: I'm at SHOULD NOT on my copy already.  I guess I forgot to push it.

> Clients MUST NOT send a token received in a NEW_TOKEN frame from one server

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Therefore, clients MUST NOT send a token received in a NEW_TOKEN frame from one server
```

address in an Initial packet that is sent to a different server address. As
strict equality might reduce the utility of this mechanism, clients MAY employ
heuristics that result in different server addresses being treated as
equivalent, such as treating addresses with a shared prefix of sufficient
length as being functionally equivalent (for instance, /24 in IPv4 or /56 in
IPv6). In addition, clients SHOULD treat a preferred address that is
successfully validated as equivalent to the address on which the connection was
made; see {{preferred-address}}.

Sending a Retry packet ({{packet-retry}}) offers a server the option to change
the Token field. After sending a Retry, the server can also control the
Destination Connection ID field of subsequent Initial packets from the client.
This also might allow indirect control over the encrypted content of Initial

> packets. However, the exchange of a Retry packet validates the server address,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
packets. However, the exchange of a Retry packet validates the server's address,
```

thereby preventing the use of subsequent Initial packets for request forgery.

### Request Forgery with Preferred Addresses

Servers can specify a preferred address, which clients then migrate to after
confirming the handshake; see {{preferred-address}}.

The Destination Connection ID field of packets that the client sends to a

> preferred address can be used for request forgery.

Reviewer 4: merge with previous para

> A client SHOULD NOT send non-probing frames to a preferred address prior to

Reviewer 4: Why not a MUST NOT? What reasons do we have to allow this to happen?

Author: I'm good with MUST NOT.

validating that address; see {{address-validation}}. This greatly reduces the
options that a server has to control the encrypted portion of datagrams.

This document does not offer any additional specific countermeasures that can
be implemented by endpoints aside from the generic measures described in

> {{forgery-generic}}.

Reviewer 4: Why is this paragraph useful? It doesn't seem to follow from the previous text, so it seems to be out of place. Did you mean to connect it in some way?

Also, the requirements above _are_ countermeasures, aren't they?

Author: These countermeasures are not comprehensive.  Hence "additional".  Re-reading this though, I felt the need to reword...

connection migration to cause a server to send datagrams to that address.

The Destination Connection ID field in any packets that a server subsequently
sends to this spoofed address can be used for request forgery.

A server that only sends probing packets ({{probing}}) to an address prior to
address validation provides an attacker with only limited control over the
encrypted portion of datagrams. However, particularly for NAT rebinding, this
can adversely affect performance. If the server sends frames carrying
application data, an attacker might be able to control most of the content of
datagrams.

This document does not offer specific countermeasures that can be implemented
by endpoints aside from the generic measures described in {{forgery-generic}}.
However, countermeasures for address spoofing at the network level, in
particular ingress filtering {{?BCP38=RFC2267}}, are especially effective
against attacks that use spoofing and originate from an external network.

### Generic Request Forgery Countermeasures {#forgery-generic}

The most effective defense against request forgery attacks is to modify
vulnerable services to use strong authentication. However, this is not always

> possible when deploying QUIC. This section outlines some others steps that QUIC

Reviewer 4: "However, this is not always possible when deploying QUIC." This seems to suggest that it's a weakness of QUIC. I suspect what you are trying to say is that perhaps "However, this may not always be within the control of the QUIC deployment. This section outlines steps that QUIC endpoints could take to unilaterally protect against such attacks."

endpoints could take. These additional steps are all discretionary as,
depending on circumstances, they could interfere with or prevent legitimate
uses.

> Services offered over loopback interfaces (that is, ::1 or 127.0.0.1) often

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Services offered over loopback interfaces (that is, the IPv6 address ::1 or the IPv4 address 127.0.0.1) often
```

lack proper authentication. Endpoints MAY prevent connection attempts or
migration to a loopback address. Endpoints SHOULD NOT allow connections or
migration to a loopback address if the same service was previously

> available over a different interface or the address was provided by a service

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
available at a different address, or if the address was was provided by a service
```

at a non-loopback address. Endpoints that depend on these capabilities could
offer an option to disable these protections.

Similarly, endpoints could regard a change in address to link-local address
{{?RFC4291}} or an address in a private use range {{?RFC1918}} from a global,
unique-local {{?RFC4193}}, or non-private address as a potential attempt at
request forgery. Endpoints could refuse to use these addresses entirely, but

> that carries a significant risk of interfering with legitimate cases. Endpoints

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that carries a significant risk of interfering with legitimate uses. Endpoints
```

SHOULD NOT refuse to use an address unless they have specific knowledge about

> the network that indicates that sending datagrams to unvalidated addresses in a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the network indicating that sending datagrams to unvalidated addresses in a
```

given range is not safe.

Endpoints MAY choose to reduce the risk of request forgery by not including
values from NEW_TOKEN frames in Initial packets or by only sending probing

> frames in packets prior to completing address validation. Note that this might
> not constrain some attacks as it does not prevent an attacker from using the
> Destination Connection ID field.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
frames in packets prior to completing address validation. Note that this does
not prevent an attacker from using the Destination Connection ID field for
an attack.
```

Endpoints are not expected to have specific information about the location of
servers that could be vulnerable targets of a request forgery attack. However,
it might be possible over time to identify specific UDP ports that are common
targets of attacks or particular patterns in datagrams that are used for

> attacks. Endpoints MAY choose to avoid sending datagrams to these ports or that
> match these patterns prior to validating the target address. Endpoints MAY
> retire connection IDs containing patterns known to be problematic without using
> them.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
attacks. Endpoints MAY avoid sending datagrams to these ports or not send
datagrams that match these patterns prior to validating the destination address.
Endpoints MAY retire connection IDs containing patterns known to be problematic
without using them.
```

Note:

: Modifying endpoints to apply these protections is more efficient than

>   deploying network-based protections, as endpoints don't need to perform

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  deploying network-based protections, as endpoints do not need to perform
```

Control over the destination of UDP datagrams presents three options for
request forgery attack:

* initial connection establishment ({{handshake}}), where a server is able to
  choose where a client sends datagrams;

* preferred addresses ({{preferred-address}}), where a server is able to choose
  where a client sends datagrams; and

* spoofed connection migrations ({{address-spoofing}}), where a client is able
  to use source address spoofing to select where a server sends subsequent
  datagrams.

These three options all involve cases where an endpoint sends datagrams to a
host that might not understand QUIC. That is, these packets are sent prior to
address validation; see {{address-validation}}.

Outside of the encrypted portion of packets, QUIC offers an endpoint several
options for controlling the content of UDP datagrams that a peer sends. The
Destination Connection ID field offers direct control over early bytes of every
packet sent by a peer; see {{connection-id}}. The Token field in Initial
packets offers a server control over other bytes of Initial packets; see
{{packet-initial}}.

There are no measures in the protocol to prevent indirect control over the

> encrypted portions of packets. it is necessary to assume that endpoints are

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
encrypted portions of packets. It is necessary to assume that endpoints are
```

able to control the contents of frames that a peer sends, especially those
frames that convey application data, such as STREAM frames. Though this depends
to some degree on details of the application protocol, some control is possible
in many protocol usage contexts. As the attacker has access to packet

> protection keys, they are able to predict how a peer will encrypt future

Reviewer 2: I think that's true.  An encryption algorithm that incorporated, say, an input salt would have unpredictable output even given predictable plaintext.

Of course, that's probably equivalent to appending some random bytes to the input plaintext, then dropping those bytes following decryption.  If we wanted to, would that be a potential mitigation?

packets. Successful control over datagram content then only requires that the
attacker be able to predict the packet number and placement of frames in
packets with some amount of reliability.

Limiting control over datagram content is considered infeasible. The primary
focus of subsequent sections is analysis of the ways in which datagrams are
sent prior to address validation.

### Request Forgery with Initial Packets

Servers are assumed to be able to choose the IP address and port on which they
advertise their availability, so Initial packets from clients are assumed to be
available for use in this sort of attack. The address validation implicit in
the handshake ensures that - for a new connection - a client will not send
other types of packet to a destination that does not understand QUIC and is
willing to accept connections.

Unlike other packets, packet protection provides good protection against
control over the contents of Initial packets. The choice of an unpredictable
Destination Connection ID by clients ensures that servers are unable to control

> any of the encryption portion of Initial packets.

Reviewer 6: This para's grammar hurts my head. Alternative might be

"Initial packet protection provides resilience to control of contents by servers. Client choice of an unpredictable Destination Connection ID ensures servers are unable to control any of the encrypted portion of Initial packets."

> any of the encryption portion of Initial packets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
any of the encrypted portion of Initial packets.
```

> The only field in an Initial packets that is open to server control is the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The only field in Initial packets that is open to server control is the
```

received.

Clients MUST NOT send a token received in a NEW_TOKEN frame from one server
address in an Initial packet that is sent to a different server address. As
strict equality might reduce the utility of this mechanism, clients MAY employ
heuristics that result in different server addresses being treated as
equivalent, such as treating addresses with a shared prefix of sufficient
length as being functionally equivalent (for instance, /24 in IPv4 or /56 in
IPv6). In addition, clients SHOULD treat a preferred address that is
successfully validated as equivalent to the address on which the connection was
made; see {{preferred-address}}.

Sending a Retry packet ({{packet-retry}}) offers a server the option to change
the Token field. After sending a Retry, the server can also control the
Destination Connection ID field of subsequent Initial packets from the client.
This also might allow indirect control over the encrypted content of Initial
packets. However, the exchange of a Retry packet validates the server address,
thereby preventing the use of subsequent Initial packets for request forgery.

### Request Forgery with Preferred Addresses

> Servers can specify a preferred address, which clients then to migrate to after

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Servers can specify a preferred address, which clients then migrate to after
```

application data, an attacker might be able to control most of the content of
datagrams.

This document does not offer specific countermeasures that can be implemented
by endpoints aside from the generic measures described in {{forgery-generic}}.
However, countermeasures for address spoofing at the network level, in
particular ingress filtering {{?BCP38=RFC2267}}, are especially effective
against attacks that use spoofing and originate from an external network.

### Generic Request Forgery Countermeasures {#forgery-generic}

The most effective defense against request forgery attacks is to modify
vulnerable services to use strong authentication. However, this is not always
possible when deploying QUIC. This section outlines some others steps that QUIC
endpoints could take. These additional steps are all discretionary as,
depending on circumstances, they could interfere with or prevent legitimate
uses.

Services offered over loopback interfaces (that is, ::1 or 127.0.0.1) often
lack proper authentication. Endpoints MAY prevent connection attempts or
migration to a loopback address. Endpoints SHOULD NOT allow connections or

> migration to a non-loopback address if the same service was previously

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
migration to a loopback address if the same service was previously
```

I'm not sure, but maybe this is the intent?

available over a different interface or the address was provided by a service
at a non-loopback address. Endpoints that depend on these capabilities could
offer an option to disable these protections.

> 

Reviewer 8: That's nice, but in many scenarios any of the node addresses can be used to reach services local to the node, in the same way as loopback addresses. In server farm scenarios, this requires guessing the local IP of the specific server, but that can probably be done. Same for clients behind NAT.

Reviewer 5: @huitema This is certainly a way to mount an attack on services that assume that they are serving friendly clients and the network perimeter is secure.  It happens, especially when services listen only on RFC1918/unique-local or link-local IPs.  It happens even more often with services only listen to loopback and, therefore, think they are immune to any threats coming from outside of the host.

That's why I'd generalize this from "non-loopback -> loopback" to “globally routable IP space” -> “RFC1918/unique-local IP space” -> “link-local” -> “loopback”.

Similarly, endpoints could regard a change in address to link-local address
{{?RFC4291}} or an address in a private use range {{?RFC1918}} from a global,
unique-local {{?RFC4193}}, or non-private address as a potential attempt at
request forgery. Endpoints could refuse to use these addresses entirely, but
that carries a significant risk of interfering with legitimate cases. Endpoints
SHOULD NOT refuse to use an address unless they have specific knowledge about
the network that indicates that sending datagrams to unvalidated addresses in a
given range is not safe.

> 

Reviewer 8: There is indeed a valid scenario for client and server discovering that they are behind the same NAT. Wasn't that scenario addressed in Web-RTC using a discovery protocol involving temporary names, in an attempt at privacy?

Reviewer: I think you're referring to [draft-ietf-rtcweb-mdns-ice-candidates](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-rtcweb-mdns-ice-candidates). For us to do something like that we'd need a way to convey hostnames in preferred_address or elsewhere, and I'm not sure we should be doing that.
